ACTION PLAN FOR PREPARATIONS OF THE ESTONIAN  PRESIDENCY OF THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN  UNION
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  2
Contents  Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 3  1 General ................................................................................................................................ 4  1.1 Main tasks of the Presidency of the Council of the EU ............................................... 4  1.2 Preparations for the Presidency ................................................................................... 7  1.3 Principles of holding the Presidency ........................................................................... 8  1.4 Shaping policy goals and the Programme of the Presidency ..................................... 10  2 personnel ........................................................................................................................... 13  2.1 Horizontal principles of the personnel strategy of the Presidency ............................ 13  2.2 Personnel needed for performing the tasks of the Presidency and their competence 14  2.3 Recruitment of the Presidency personnel .................................................................. 15  2.4 Personnel development .............................................................................................. 15  2.5 Support, incentive and compensatory measures ........................................................ 17  3 Organisation of events in Estonia and logistical support for the Presidency .................... 18  3.1 Organisation of events ............................................................................................... 19  3.2 Services ...................................................................................................................... 21  3.3 Procurement ............................................................................................................... 25  4 The Estonian Permanent Representation to the European Union ..................................... 27  4.1 Adaptation of the PREU building for the Presidency and supporting activities ....... 27  4.2 Support activities in Brussels .................................................................................... 28  5 Communication and the international programme ........................................................... 30  5.1 Organisation of communication ................................................................................ 30  5.2 The target groups for communication ....................................................................... 31  5.3 Principles of communication ..................................................................................... 32  5.4 Communication messages ......................................................................................... 32  5.5 Communication stages ............................................................................................... 33  5.6 Introducing Estonia and the organisation of cultural events ..................................... 36
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  3
INTRODUCTION
Good organisational and substantive preparation for the Presidency and its implementation is  one of the Estonian Government’s six priorities. Meeting this challenge will require clear  leadership, thorough planning and dedication from all parties, starting from the Government  members and Ministry Heads, to the Estonian Permanent Representation to the European  Union, and last but not least to the members of the support personnel. The Members of  Parliament (the Riigikogu) will also assume an important role as representatives of Estonia.  Estonian nationals having work experience in European Union institutions too can contribute  significantly to the success of the Estonian Presidency.  The Presidency will be a united effort on the part of the whole nation; it will provide  opportunities not only to the public sector but also to Estonian businesses and the social  economy sector.  The aim of the Action Plan for Preparations of the Estonian Presidency of the Council of the  European Union is to clarify the tasks and activities necessary for preparing the Presidency,  and specify their time frame along with those who will be responsible. This Action Plan  focuses on the development of the capabilities necessary for the optimal functioning of the  EU Presidency as a system and contains the principles underlying the preparation as well as  specific deadlines. This Action Plan will serve as a planning document and guideline for all  parties involved and will be amended as appropriate. The Government will implement the  Action Plan with the assistance of the Government Committee preparing the Action Plan.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  4
1 GENERAL
1.1 Main tasks of the Presidency of the Council of the EU
The Presidency of the Council of the European Union, (hereinafter the Council), rotates  among all EU Member States every 6 months. Estonia will hold the Presidency of the Council  (hereinafter the Presidency) in the first half of 2018.  The main substantive task of the Presidency is to direct the legislative agenda of the European  Union (hereinafter the EU) and to formulate the policies of the institution itself through  different tiers of decision-making in the Council. The Presidency represents the Council in  negotiations with the European Parliament (hereinafter the EP) under the ordinary legislative  procedure. The Presidency also represents the Council, in matters within its jurisdiction, in  relations with other EU institutions, third countries and the public. Since the entry into force  of the Lisbon Treaty, the European Council (hereinafter the EC) in which Estonia is  represented by the Prime Minister, has been the major strategic body setting the agenda of the  Council in relation to the selection of issues, political priorities and the pace of negotiations.  The scale and scope of legislative drafting required by the Presidency varies and rests on both  the initiatives of the European Commission and the political priorities of the Member States,  the Council and other institutions. The Presidency is normally prepared to lead negotiations  on 500 to 700 pieces of draft legislation (including both legislation and political documents), 1
which are not equally distributed across policy areas. Under the leadership of Mr Jean-Claude  Juncker, the current President of the European Commission, the Commission has taken a  direction towards less legislative output, which may affect the number of legislative initiatives  to be processed during the Estonian Presidency. Latvia, whose Presidency coincided with the  beginning of a new Commission’s term of office, worked on 302 drafts. The priority issues of  the Presidency are normally discussed at informal ministerial meetings, held in the country  holding the Council Presidency, as well as at various conferences and workshops.  By the end of the Presidency, approximately one third of all negotiated drafts are formally  adopted 2 . Over the years and particularly after the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty, the  ordinary legislative procedure (formerly known as the co-decision procedure) has gained  importance. Reaching an agreement with the EP as co-legislator requires increasingly more  time and effort from the Presidency. The average processing time of an ordinary legislative  procedure, from the submission of draft legislation to its adoption, is 1 to 2 years. Therefore,  when assessing the outcomes of the Presidency, progress towards advancing negotiations on  drafts during the Presidency is as important as their official adoption.    1  Poland, for example, prepared approximately 600 draft proposals, Cyprus prepared 500, and Lithuania 562.  2  For example, the list of Denmark’s achievements included 209 Acts (those proposed by the Council itself as  well as co-decisions with the European Parliament).
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  5
In order to ensure the consistency of the Council’s substantive work, three successive EU  Presidencies draft an 18-month joint programme. Estonia works in a ‘trio’ with the United  Kingdom (scheduled for the second half of 2017) and Bulgaria (scheduled for the second half  of 2018).  The Presidency is responsible for managing the Council's work – chairing meetings in the  Council, organising bilateral and/or multilateral meetings, offering and mediating  compromises both within the Council and with the EP, signing and executing agreements,  and, between these meetings, advancing the work of achieving agreements and forming  consensus. The Presidency is also responsible for planning meetings in the Council, preparing  agendas for those meetings and making sure that they reflect the relevant issues, substantive  tasks, priorities and interests. 3  The Presidency is responsible for the application of the  Council's Rules of Procedure and for the proper organisation of discussions.  The Council’s leadership work operates in three administrative spheres: 1) the political –  involving the Ministers, 2) the Permanent Representatives (and their deputies) who prepare  the work of the Council, and 3) the experts – the working party chairs. Ministers and  permanent representatives are responsible for holding negotiations on the most complicated  and politically sensitive issues. The Council meets in 10 different configurations 4  of ministers;  during the course of 6 months approximately 30-50 meetings of the different Council  configurations take place. Ministry-level meetings also take place within the Eurogroup,  which usually comes together in the framework of the Economic and Financial Affairs  Council; under the Latvian Presidency, the Eurogroup met nine times. Each configuration of  the Council also may have an informal meeting, held in the country holding the Presidency, to  facilitate a more open exchange of views and discussions on general political issues 5 .      3  The exceptions are the Foreign Affairs Council, hereinafter the ‘FAC’, and the EC, which are not chaired by  the Presidency, although it does participate in the shaping of their agendas.3]  4  Nine of these configurations are chaired by the Minister of the Member State holding the Presidency, while the  Foreign Affairs Council is usually chaired by the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security  Policy. However, when the FAC discusses common trade policy issues, it is presided over by the representative  of the Member State holding the rotating Presidency of the Council of the EU.  5  The only official meeting of Ministers which is held in the Member State is the meeting of the Eurogroup  Ministers, which takes place within the unofficial framework of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  6
Table 1. Councils during the Presidency periods of 2014-I–2015-I .  Configurations (and fields) of the council  Frequency and format of meetings (during the  Presidency period)  The responsible  (co-responsible)  Estonian ministry  Greece (2014 I) Italy (2014 II) Latvia (2015 I)
F o rm a l  In fo rm a l
F o rm a l  In fo rm a l
F o rm a l  In fo rm a l
General Affairs Council (including enlargement,  institutional issues, etc.)  4 2 6 2 5 0 MFA  Foreign Affairs Council 10 3 8 3 9 4 MFA (MD)  Economic and Financial Affairs Council 5 1 5 1 5 1 MoF  Justice and Home Affairs Council 2 1 2 1 2 1 MoJ, MoI  Employment, Social Policy, Health and  Consumer Affairs Council  2 1 3 2 2 1 MSA  Competitiveness Council (including the internal  market, industry and research)  2 1 2 1 2 1 MEAC (MER)  Transport, Telecommunications and Energy  Council  4 2 4 2 4 1 MEAC  Agriculture and Fisheries Council 5 1 5 1 5 1 MoA (ME)  Environment Council 2 1 2 1 2 1 MoE  Education, Youth and Culture Council 2 0 2 2 1 0 MER, MC  Total  38 13 39 16 37 11   51 55 48  Source: The EU Secretariat of the Government Office
At the officials’ level, the meetings of the two configurations of Coreper 6  (Coreper II and  Coreper I) are chaired by the Permanent Representative and Deputy Permanent  Representative of the country holding the Presidency, while the work of approximately 200  working parties or committees is chaired by the national experts of the country holding the  Presidency 7 . Over the six months of the Presidency, between 1600 and 2000 official meetings  are held in various formats of the Council. Added to this are meetings with various informal  formats as well as bilateral and multilateral negotiations. For example, approximately 130  official tripartite meetings (called trilogues 8 ) are held, at which the Presidency is represented  either by the Minister responsible for the area involved, the Permanent Representative or  Deputy Permanent Representative. Added to this are preparatory technical meetings for the  trilogues, at which the Presidency is represented by the Chairs of the Council’s working    6  The Committee of Permanent Representatives (Coreper) is responsible for preparing the work of the Council  and for carrying out the tasks entrusted to it by the Council. The meetings of Coreper are chaired, depending  on the agenda, either by the Permanent Representative (Coreper II) or the Deputy Permanent Representative  (Coreper I) of the country holding the Presidency.  7  This number varies; some operate on an ad hoc basis and do not meet regularly.  8  The participants are the European Parliament, the European Commission and the Council.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  7
parties. The estimated number of such preparatory meetings is 2 to 3 times higher than the  number of official trilogues (260–390). Thus, up to 450 meetings at various levels may be  held over six months with the participation of the three institutions.  Holding the Presidency entails organisational obligations also for the National Parliament  (Riigikogu): meetings with the Chairpersons of national parliaments, Chairpersons and  members of the EU Affairs Committees, Chairpersons of the Foreign Affairs Committees  and/or National Defence Committees.  1.2 Preparations for the Presidency
On 24 May 2012, the Estonian Government established a committee for preparing for the  Presidency (hereinafter the Presidency Coordination Committee). The committee is chaired  by the Secretary of State and the first meeting of the committee was held on 20 June 2012.  During the early phase of preparations, which ran until the end of 2014, information on the  Presidency was obtained for thorough analysis both from the EU institutions and from the  recent past and future Presidencies of the Council of the EU. The analysis identified all the  duties of the Presidency and evaluated Estonia’s upcoming duties against its existing  administrative capabilities and possibilities as well as made suggestions for capability- building. The first Action Plan for the Presidency, which included decisions concerning the  principles of holding the Presidency, was approved by the Government on 30 January 2014.  The Action Plan will be implemented during 2015–2018. The central budget for 2015–2018  was prepared based on the Action Plan. When preparing Presidency events (including official  and informal meetings hosted by the Presidency) and other related activities, preference is  given to solutions which reduce costs while increasing developmental and creative  capabilities and facilitate the multiple use of systems. The central budget of the personnel  policy comprises the cost of personnel development (language testing, trainings, paid  traineeships), the salaries of the Presidency personnel, financial compensation, travel and  subsistence expenses, recruitment costs and the costs of implementing occupational health  and safety measures. Besides state resources, the EU structural funds will be used for  strengthening the administrative capacity. The central budget of the Presidency also includes  the costs of events to be organised, and the related additional tasks at the Permanent  Representation of Estonia to the EU (hereinafter PREU) or the General Secretariat of the  Council of the EU. The cultural programme of the Presidency will be funded from the budgets  of the Presidency and the Programme of the 100th Anniversary of the Republic of Estonia,  (hereinafter Estonia 100). The budget also provides funding for the adaptation of the PREU  infrastructure. Budgetary planning and the development of principles for its distribution is the  responsibility of the central coordination unit of the Presidency; payments will be partially  decentralised.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  8
1.3 Principles of holding the Presidency
Estonia’s aim in holding the Presidency is to be a good pilot whose goal is to guide and direct  the Council’s activities and the EU law-making process as efficiently as possible, by building  consensus and acting as an honest broker.  During its Presidency, Estonia is committed to carrying out all the key duties of the  Presidency and striving for a professional and efficient Presidency with an open and  transparent working style. The goals set for the Presidency must be sufficiently ambitious yet  achievable and targeted to specific solutions.  This Action Plan is based on the premise that the significant improvements in administrative  capability achieved during preparations for and implementation of the Presidency can be  harnessed in the interests of Estonia after the Presidency. Therefore, the Presidency is an  investment in the growth of the knowledge, skills and capabilities of the Estonian civil service  and in the increase of our capacities for functioning within the EU.  The coordination of the Presidency will be based on a management model in which the  existing national EU coordination system for strategic planning and general management is  used, while everyday operational management will take place in permanent representation  headquarters in Brussels.  In general, no new coordination mechanisms or structures will be created for the Presidency,  but maximum use will be made of the existing EU coordination systems, work organisation  and practices as well as of the sectoral expertise of the Ministries. During the preparation for  and the tenure of the Presidency, consideration will be given to the temporary expansion of  the coordinating system for EU affairs, including the EU Secretariat of the Government  Office, the Ministries, the PREU and, according to need, enlisting other Estonian foreign  representatives with competence in EU affairs.  The Government will decide, no later than by the beginning of 2017, which post will be  responsible for representing the Council and act as its spokesperson in its relations with the  European Parliament.  The central coordination unit responsible for preparations and implementing the Presidency  is the Government Office, whose duties include:   general coordination, the compilation of the Action Plan and budget, coordinating and  ensuring implementation;   development of the Presidency programme and political priorities in cooperation with  the ministries;   coordination of recruitment and development of personnel;   organisation of informal Council meetings and other high-level events;
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  9
 coordination of cooperation between the PREU, the Ministries and other national  authorities;   communication with EU institutions and other Member States;   development and coordination of the implementation of the communications strategy;   coordination of the programme to showcase Estonia’s arts and culture.  Duties of the Ministries are as follows:   preparing and implementing the Action Plan for the Presidency in their policy areas;   the development and implementation of the policy issues in their area of competence,  including chairing working parties and additional working formats, leading, preparing  for, and coordinating negotiations; communication with EU institutions and other  Member States, including development of contacts with key figures from other  Member States and institutions;   participation in inter-ministerial working groups (networks) and work formats related  to the Presidency;   the partial recruitment and development of personnel;   organising meetings of experts, seminars and conferences in their area of expertise;   the implementation of communication plan in their area of competence.  Furthermore, several ministries are involved in performing the horizontal tasks of the  Presidency within their area of competence. The Ministry of the Interior is responsible for  managing and coordinating the preparation and implementation of measures related to  security and public order during the Presidency. The Ministry of Finance supports the  Government Office in the development and implementation of the personnel policy of the  Presidency and the procurement system. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for  filling in, if necessary, for the Union's High Representative for the Common Foreign and  Security Policy in political dialogues with third countries; the functioning of the PREU;  contributing to the development and implementation of the cultural programme; advising the  organisers of events to ensure the correct protocol, and coordinating the protocol of high-level  events 9 . Along with the Estonia 100 team of the Government Office, the Ministry of Culture  has a major role in the development and implementation of the cultural programme. All  ministries are involved in the work of preparatory working groups, such as those for protocol,  procurements, personnel and training, communication. The authority managing the  parliamentary dimension of the Presidency will be the Chancellery of the Riigikogu  (Parliament).    9  These are informal ministerial meetings or conferences at the level of the Ministries or Members of the  European Parliament; meetings of Heads of State or Government; and high-level international summits.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  10
1.4 Shaping policy goals and the Programme of the Presidency
The work of the institutions is continuous and primarily related to negotiations over  legislation and is conducted in the framework of ordinary legislative procedure, or by co- decision with the European Parliament. Therefore, a major part of the substantive work  related to the Presidency is a so called legacy work – draft legislation and other pending  documents that the Presidency ‘inherits’ from its predecessor, to be continued in negotiations  with the European Parliament on behalf of the Council.  As the country holding the Presidency, we must be aware of and carry forward all pending  issues; however, the Presidency is also a unique opportunity to effectively direct the work  procedures of the Union and to bring forth major issues that should receive particular  attention. The Member State holding the Presidency prepares a programme to manage the  work and bring forth the cross-sectoral issues and objectives of the Presidency. The  Presidency Programme defines the issues that will receive more attention during the  Estonian Presidency and the presiding country’s approach to those issues. The Presidency  Programme builds on the work plans of the EU institutions and the objectives and issues  highlighted in Estonia’s EU policy (hereinafter EUPOL) for 2015–2019. The Presidency  Programme must be a focused strategic document, supplemented and specified by the work  programmes of the Council’s formats.  The Presidency Programme is also an important source document for communications  purposes. The messages formed through the Programme are central to the Presidency’s  communications, which along with the manner of its implementation and visual identity,  promotional items and the cultural programme have a significant impact on the identity of  Estonia as holder of the EU Presidency.  Our opportunities and limitations for selecting the key issues are determined by the period of  the Presidency which coincides with the final phase of the institutions’ work (the next  European Parliament elections will be in 2019). The Presidency and the choice of issues will  inevitably be affected by crises and key events, and especially by potential European Council  meetings and other high-level summits.  Guiding principles for the main issues (priorities) of the Presidency   Our options: when selecting the main issues for the Presidency, we need to consider  what is relevant to, and important for, Europe at this time. The selected issues (as well  as the programme as a whole) should take into account, and shape, where possible, the  work programmes of other institutions (the European Council, the European  Commission, the European Parliament) as well as of the previous Presidencies and the  Trio partners. In relation to the overall political cycles of the EU institutions, we need  to be prepared to lead the discussions in the Council on the EU’s multiannual financial  framework.   Our interests and needs: when selecting the main issues for the Presidency, we can  emphasise the issues and policy areas which are most appropriate from the perspective
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  11
of regional and national interests. Following Estonia’s new EU policy (EUPOL), the  Estonian Presidency intends to pay particular attention to the necessary steps towards  furthering the single market, to the development of the Energy Union as well as to the  strengthening of the EU’s Common Foreign Policy and EU relations with Eastern  Partnership. When opting for specific actions or draft acts, we certainly need to  consider the feasibility, relevance, sustainability and efficiency of handling those  issues.   Our strengths: when selecting the main issues for the Presidency, we should think  not only of the possibilities and interests but also of our own strengths. Holding the  Presidency will be an opportunity for us to share experiences and further develop the  issues at the European level. Therefore, an EUPOL objective relevant across the full  range of EU policies will focus on activities aimed at taking advantage of the  opportunities offered by the information society and e-solutions.  A potential cross-sectoral or priority issue should, ideally, meet all criteria, i.e. addressing the  issue is feasible, relevant and in our interests; there are potential results in the form of specific  measures and with these issues we can create added value also for Europe.  During the course of 2016 the choice of the main issues will be defined in detail by the  EUPOL and the Presidency, based on the guiding principles. Important among these will be  the Estonian Presidency’s agenda to advance the information society and promote e-solutions  within all EU policies. In parallel fashion, the possible ways of advancing this agenda into  other priority areas at the EU level will have been analysed based on EUPOL.  The priorities for the Estonian Presidency will be approved by the Government in the latter  half of 2017.  The Trio Programme  In accordance with the Council’s procedure, a Trio Programme will be prepared for the  Presidencies of the United Kingdom, Estonia and Bulgaria in order to create a general  framework for the Presidencies and ensure consistency in the work of the Council over an 18- month period. Joint action by the Trio Presidencies generates the necessary synergy for  important processes. In our Trio Programme we want to see connections with the strategic  objectives of the European Council to ensure better links between the European Council and  the Council of the European Union. The talks on the content of the Trio Programme are based  on the targets of the EUPOL.  The Trio Programme will be approved by the General Affairs Council in June 2017. The Trio  Presidencies will agree on a detailed schedule for the preparation of the Trio Programme in  early 2016.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  12
Fact sheets  For keeping account of, and to prepare for negotiations on the issues for the Presidency, we  will implement the system of fact sheets (fiche), following the example of previous  Presidencies. A fact sheet is a periodically updated planning and working document which  defines the objectives related to a specific EU draft legislation or political document and  describes the changes which have taken place in the course of addressing an issue. Fact sheets  will be prepared by the relevant ministries (in cooperation with the Estonian Permanent  Representation to the European Union) and approved by the Government. Fact sheets will be  handled and proceeded via the Draft Legislation Information System. A list of possible fact  sheets will be prepared, under the coordination of the Government Office, by the end of 2016  and the fact sheets are to be completed in 2017. The completion of fact sheets also supports  the formation of the Programme of the Presidency. The Parliament will also be involved in  the process of handling the fact sheets.  The model for compiling the Programme of the Presidency  The Government will approve a draft Trio programme and the working programme of the  Estonian Presidency and will be responsible for executing the work of the Presidency.  The EU Affairs Coordination Committee, established with the regulation of the Government,  whose members are deputy secretary generals and representatives of constitutional  institutions, will be responsible for preparing the content of the Programme. Preparatory work  for the Programme will be coordinated by the Government Office’s EU Secretariat in  cooperation with the Ministries and by involving other possible contributors (think tanks, civil  society representatives, and other stakeholders).  Active work with the Programme of the Estonian Presidency will begin in the second half of  2016 and continue until the start of the Presidency. The Government will approve the  Programme of the Presidency in December 2017. Ministries will be responsible for preparing  working programmes for the formats of the Council in their relevant areas of government.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  13
2 PERSONNEL
An important part of preparing for the Presidency is a Presidency personnel strategy  designed to take the strategic goal of the Presidency to the level of the personnel and to ensure  that personnel contributes fully to the achievement of the substantive objectives of the  Presidency.  The implementation of the personnel strategy starts with top executives in the civil  service who have a leading role in shaping and tuning the attitudes towards the EU  Presidency as a whole. The experience of previous Presidencies suggests that to have an  effective and successful Presidency we need people who view participation the in EU  Presidency as a positive challenge and are interested in and wish to contribute to the success  of that major ‘Project’. The role of top executives is to make the Presidency an attractive and  challenging undertaking that fosters personal fulfilment. However, we should not lose sight of  those back in Estonia who do a major part of the ‘homework’ and whose workload will  increase significantly during the Presidency.  The Secretary of State and Secretaries General are responsible for the overall  implementation of the Personnel Strategy. Given the horizontal nature of the EU  Presidency and the personnel strategy, the implementation of the strategy is coordinated by  the Presidency Coordination Committee. Besides the Presidency Coordination Unit of the  Government Office, the strategy is implemented by all ministries and their divisions. The  main burden of the implementation of the strategy lies with HR managers and  training/development managers as well as with the policy managers and members of the EU  Coordination Committee who will be responsible for finding, recruiting and retaining a  sufficient number of competent and talented workers.  The Presidency personnel strategy is about the development trends and needs of public  service in the specific context of the EU Presidency, but in a longer term, it is related to the  general development programmes of Estonian public service personnel and contributes to  their maximal deployment. Therefore, it is paramount that the Presidency Coordination Unit  of the Government Office, the Public Administration and Public Service Department of the  Ministry of Finance and the Top Civil Service Excellence Centre of the Government Office  cooperate in implementing the personnel strategy.  2.1 Horizontal principles of the personnel strategy of the Presidency
Taking into account the scale of the EU Presidency, the state’s limited resources and its  ambition to be a successful mediator, the personnel strategy is based on a number of  horizontal principles.   The EU Presidency is of national significance – its preparation, outcomes and  overall success require common cross-sectoral cooperation at all levels.   When preparing for and executing the Presidency, maximum use is made of the  existing structures and available people. This means that the composition of the
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  14
entire Presidency team must be optimal, civil servants are preferred when recruiting  the Presidency personnel, using term-based transfer between institutions and  considering later use of the Presidency experience for the development of integral and  efficient governance.   While the Presidency entails an extra workload for the civil service, recruitment of  additional personnel is considered to be a (temporary) derogation from the plans for  the reduction of public service employment numbers. Therefore, the Government  Office and Ministries will not reduce the number of their personnel involved in  managing the Presidency until 2018. Various forms of employment will also be used  on a limited basis.   The personnel strategy is implemented with interagency cooperation. The  horizontal recruitment model and structures are used to ensure appropriate  qualification of the personnel executing the Presidency. The participation of the  Ministries in preparing for the Presidency entails increased responsibility, while  providing an opportunity to play an active role and to have a say in the Presidency. In  addition, it ensures high motivation and contributes towards common goals.   To ensure the availability of well-prepared and motivated Presidency personnel and  their successful work, the personnel development programmes as well as measures  to increase motivation, support and compensation are developed based on the  intensity of the work as well as on the level of responsibility.
2.2 Personnel needed for performing the tasks of the Presidency and  their competence
The preparation, organisation and implementation of the Presidency require people with  different qualifications, knowledge and skills. The Presidency personnel can be divided  into two major groups:   Policy personnel responsible for preparing the substantive content of the Presidency  and executing the Presidency;   Support and technical personnel responsible for coordinating the organisational set- up of the Presidency and the preparatory work for providing practical and technical  solutions for the Presidency and all related events.  Given the number of EU issues and working groups, and based on the experiences of previous  Presidencies and the structure of the EU coordination system in Estonia, the projected number  of the Presidency personnel is 1,300, including 1,000 policy personnel and 300 support  personnel. While the majority of them are currenly working as civil servants, a number of  additional personnel are required and some services need to be outsourced.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  15
Based on the roles of the Presidency, lessons learned during previous Presidencies and  Estonia’s experiences with being an EU Member State, an Excellent Presidency  Competence Model was developed; the model describes the important skills, knowledge and  personal qualities required from the Presidency personnel.
2.3 Recruitment of the Presidency personnel
To recruit working party chairs and deputy chairs, a body of people meeting the criteria for  the job of the working party chairs and deputy chairs (called ‘the Pool’) was identified. The  Pool contains the details concerning approximately 500 people with the potential to fill the  role of the working party chair, collected in cooperation between the Ministries and the  Presidency Coordination Unit of the Government Office from within and, if necessary,  outside the civil service, e.g. officials of EU institutions, people from the private or third  sector.  In order to prepare all individuals in the Pool as well as possible to cope with their new  responsibilities, development and training activities for the working party chairs and deputy  chairs are foreseen to help them elaborate their skills and the knowledge required for the job.  The size of the Pool depends on the number of working parties to be chaired by Estonia  during the Presidency. The Estonian Presidency will be responsible for chairing  approximately 200 working parties, which means that besides finding a head and deputy head  for each working party, we need to have a reserve of about 20% for cases where new working  (sub) parties are established or other unforeseeable changes are made in the run-up to the  Presidency. The composition of the Pool was approved by the Presidency Coordination  Committee. In 2016, the Government will approve the working party chairs and deputy  chairs.  The Government will also approve the policy managers – usually deputy secretary generals –  who will be responsible for preparing, implementing, communicating and ensuring the  required outcomes of the issues that the programme will focus on.  Other roles (e.g. experts, coordinators, support personnel, etc.) related to the organisation of  the Presidency will be filled by the Ministries.  The Government Office will provide support and technical personnel for centrally organised  meetings and events. The Ministries responsible for other horizontal roles related to the  Presidency will select the personnel for the performance of their relevant duties.
2.4 Personnel development
The objective of personnel development in the context of the EU Presidency is to  prepare people for a successful Presidency and, in the long term, to improve their
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  16
qualifications for work in public service. A key lever for preparing personnel for the  Presidency consists of various development activities.  The presidency development activities for the Presidency personnel, with a total financing of  EUR 3 million from the EU Structural Funds and the budget of the Ministry of Finance, will  be carried out in 2014–2017. In addition to this amount a specific contribution of EUR  615,000 is made to the budget of the Government Office for strategic personnel placements  (e.g. seconding people as national experts or for traineeships in EU institutions).  Detailed programmes and descriptions of development and training activities, their target  groups, scope, timing and venues as well as organisational criteria are defined in the  Presidency Training Programme prepared in 2014. Development and training activities  include the development of horizontal competences, knowledge and skills as well as the  language skills required for running the Presidency. The knowledge and skills development  programmes also include opportunities for traineeship and participating in study trips,  strategic personnel placements and workshops provided by EU institutions for the country  holding the Presidency. Issue specific professional development and training activities will be  the responsibility of the relevant offices and will not be provided horizontally.  While the priority target group for the trainings are working party chairs and deputy chairs,  training for other target groups is also foreseen. Depending on the location of the Presidency  personnel, personnel development and training events will take place either in Tallinn or in  Brussels.
In order to find partners for the implementation of the proposed personnel development and  training activities, national and international tenders will be organised. It is important that  personnel development and training activities are of high quality and mainly based on active  learning methods. Preference is given to paper-free personnel development and training  activities.
The main foreign language of the Presidency is English – English will be the language of  chairing working party meetings, negotiating with participants, making written text proposals,  etc. Language proficiency tests were conducted in the second half of 2015 for potential heads  of working parties and other personnel involved in the Presidency in order to establish their  English language skills. In order to support language learning, the proposed personnel  development and training activities will be conducted mainly in English.
French language training will be available for those officials who will work in formations  where French is used as the working language and no translation is provided, and as a  motivational measure for those whose English language proficiency is sufficient.
Smooth organisation of personnel training programmes and workshops provided by EU  institutions is ensured by cooperation partners chosen by means of a public procurement  procedure, supported by a special central training environment designed for that purpose.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  17
Personnel development and training activities were launched by stages. In 2014, the focus was  on planning a central training programme; in 2015 on public procurement of development and  training activities and encouraging personnel to gain experiences related to the Presidency.  2016 and 2017 will be most intensive in terms of personnel development and training. Reports  on personnel development and training will be prepared in 2018.
2.5 Support, incentive and compensatory measures
To ensure the availability of well-prepared and motivated Presidency personnel and their  successful work, support and compensation measures are developed based on the intensity  of the work as well as on the level of responsibility. These measures include:   development, acknowledgement and observance of common values and attitudes;   development and training activities and traineeships provided by the state (in the  period 2015—2017);   financial compensation;   recovery measures;   recognition;   career planning for employees.  Amendments will be made to the relevant existing legislation, as appropriate, to make  compensatory and incentive measures of the Presidency available.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  18
3 ORGANISATION OF EVENTS IN ESTONIA AND LOGISTICAL SUPPORT  FOR THE PRESIDENCY
In addition to fulfilling the role of the Presidency in Brussels, a major task is also the  organisation of events in Estonia. On the one hand, these are mandatory or traditional  meetings; on the other hand, the organisation of events in the country holding the Presidency  is an excellent opportunity to introduce the country and its culture. Events that can be held  in Estonia:   high-level international summits10;   informal meetings of ministers;   informal meetings of experts;   seminars and conferences held under the Presidency;   visits to Estonia (including visits of the delegations of the European Parliament,  Coreper II, Coreper I and PSC 11  Ambassadors, Commissioners of the European  Commission);   meetings of national parliamentary committees, the COSAC12 plenary meeting and  Conference for the Common Foreign and Security Policy;  To ensure a consistent level of quality, an organisational standard have been prepared for each  event; the standard will serve as a basis for planning resources, procuring services and work  division between organisers. The standards are built on the traditions and best practices of  previous Presidencies in order to facilitate the organisation of meetings at all levels.  The sheer number of events to be organised and funded by Estonia as holder of the Presidency  (between 150 and 200 events, based on the experience of previous Presidencies) and the  number of visitors (between 20,000 and 30,000 in the six months of the Presidency)  emphasises the need for thorough planning and efficient organisation. The Central  Coordination Unit at the EU Secretariat of the Government Office is responsible for  organising high-level events and coordinating other Presidency events. Expert-level events as  well as seminars and conferences held under the Presidency will as a rule be organised by the  Ministries or their divisions in accordance with the relevant organisational standards. The  central Coordination Unit will provide centralised services to be agreed on by the beginning    10  to our knowledge, no regular summit meetings between the EU Heads of State or Government and  associations of third countries are scheduled for the first half of 2018; regular summit meetings with associations  of third countries are The Eastern partnership summit, The EU-Latin American and Caribbean Summit, The  Asia-Europe summit and The EU-Africa Summit;  11  The Political and Security Committee which is responsible for the Common Foreign and Security Policy  (CFSP) and Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) issues in the EU;  12 The Conference of Parliamentary Committees for EU Affairs.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  19
of 2017. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be responsible for the organisation and logistics  of the events of the PREU and embassies.  National parliaments also have an important role in EU law-making. A number of conferences  and meetings to be organised by the Estonian Parliament will reflect the parliamentary  dimension of the EU Presidency. The events related to the parliamentary dimension of the  Presidency will be coordinated by the Chancellery of the Riigikogu (Parliament).  The protocol and security measures will be established depending on the level of the guests.  The State Protocol Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be responsible for the  coordination of the event protocol of the meetings at the levels of Heads of State or  Government and Ministers. The State Protocol Department will provide training on the  protocol for organisers of expert-level events, issue a manual on the protocol to facilitate the  organisation of events and, as appropriate, advise event organisers during the Presidency.  Discussions on organisational and protocol-related issues and information exchange between  ministries, the Chancellery of the Riigikogu and other stakeholders will be held in the inter- ministerial working group on protocol-related issues and inter-ministerial working group on  procurement issues.  Ensuring the security of events, i.e. protecting individuals and guarding objects, will be  based on the fundamental principles of ensuring public order and security during the Estonian  Presidency, formulated by the Ministry of the Interior, and on the security assessment that is  periodically updated depending on the level of a meeting, as well as on the Regulation of the  Government “Principles for the organisation of the protection of individuals and guarding of  objects, implementation methods and the procedure for cooperation”.  3.1 Organisation of events
Organising a big number of events in Estonia in the period of six months of the Presidency  entails considering, among other things, the following:   events should be resource efficient, yet, when planning an event, it should be taken  into account that each choice may entail extra costs (e.g. transport costs from the  airport to a low-rent venue may be higher than savings on the rent);   the availability of venues and high-quality accommodation as well as the capacity to  ensure guest safety places limits on planning a number of major events on the same  date;   when planning the calendar of events, similar events would be organised in succession  to reduce the cost of installing equipment;   according to the Government Office, there are no suitable venues available in Estonia  for meetings with a large number of participants and to facilitate the needs of  interpretation; however, a number of venues can be adapted for that purpose;
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  20
 the calendars of Presidency events and local events will be coordinated in cooperation  with local authorities;   stakeholders and NGOs may plan meetings on the same dates as important Presidency  meetings or topical meetings which would add a burden on transport and  accommodation;   the choice of venues in Estonia is affected by the limited number of direct flights from  Europe. Events should be planned based on the principle that each delegate can travel  from their home country to the venue of an event as quickly and with as little effort as  possible;   Estonia will hold the Presidency from January to the end of June; therefore, weather  conditions should be taken into account when planning events, in particular in the first  months of the year. The end of the six months term of the Presidency coincides with  the beginning of the tourism season which affects the cost of accommodation and  transport.  Events calendar planning  The political calendar of the Presidency comprises three linked calendars: the political  calendar of the Presidency, the calendar of meetings in Brussels and the calendar of meetings  in Estonia. The central Presidency Coordination Unit of the Government Office is responsible  for the calendar of events in Estonia, while the PREU is responsible for the political calendar  and the calendar of working parties in Brussels. The first version of the political calendar will  be available no later than in the first quarter of 2017. The political calendar will be specified  in the second quarter of 2017; however, the calendar may be amended at any time during the  Presidency. Previous Presidencies have used various calendar models, distributing the events  across the six months of the Presidency (in a state-owned venue of suitable size) or  concentrating the events in a couple of months. When planning the calendar of events, the  following aspects should be taken into account:   the calendar takes into account the priorities of the Presidency, needs of the  responsible Ministries and timing of large-scale conferences and high-level meetings  to avoid overlapping;   without weekends, national and European holidays, approximately 100 working days  will be available for events in the first half of 2018. Preparatory events of the  Presidency may also take place before 2018;   the calendar on the website of the Presidency should be easily updated and user- friendly (including venues and descriptions of routes).  The central Coordination Unit for the Presidency  The central Coordination Unit at the Government Office comprises two teams: the Event  Coordination Team and the Services Team. The Event Coordination Team is responsible
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  21
for planning and organising events in the run up to and during the Presidency, communicating  with partners, including local authorities, embassies of other countries and the Organising  Committee of Estonia 100. The Services Team is responsible for ensuring services in  accordance with the approved standard, planning tenders and advising organisers of the  events. Duties of the central Coordinating Unit at the Government Office:   horizontal coordination of all events related to the Estonian Presidency, resource  planning and coordination of the events calendar;   organisation of informal meetings of ministers and summits;   organisation of high-level workshops and conferences;   centralised provision of support services for events organised by other authorities in  order to save money.  Duties of the Ministries are as follows:   preparing an event programme in the area of government of each Ministry in  cooperation with the central Coordination Unit, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and  the Ministry of the Interior;   organisation of informal meetings of experts;   organisation of expert-level seminars and conferences.  3.2 Services
Proper organisation of Presidency events requires professional services. The impression  created during an event will determine whether a participant wishes to return to Estonia as a  tourist and would recommend Estonia as a tourist destination, thus supporting our tourism  sector and economy after the Presidency. Such impressions are created from the moment a  guest arrives at the Airport, and at the accommodations and extend to the catering.  Accreditation  The organisation of an event comprises a number of activities. A key factor for the collection  of preliminary information necessary for the smooth organisation of events (e.g. catering,  special requirements for access and security) is a comprehensive and user-friendly delegate  accreditation system. Besides enabling the identification of individuals (e.g. by using  badges), the system should support all fields of organisation, including planning the calendar  and transport, booking accommodation, and keeping account of souvenirs. In order to find or  commission software solutions facilitating the organisation of events, the Government Office  has signed a cooperation agreement with the Centre of Registers and Information Systems.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  22
Reception at the airport  The majority of delegates will arrive in Estonia through Tallinn Airport. Heads of State or  Government, ministers, guests of equal protocol level and the accompanying delegations are  greeted in the airport’s VIP lounge.  Delegates travelling separately from the head of their delegation and participants of expert- level meetings are provided information about transport, about Tallinn and Estonia and the  event at the airport Presidency information desk.  Delegation liaison officers  At ministerial meetings, liaison officers act as an interface between organisers and  delegations, accompanying and advising guests during the programme (arrival and departure,  organisational information, access paths, special requests, etc.). When recruiting and training  liaison officers who will represent Estonia, special attention should be paid to their language  proficiency, experience and organisational skills.  Transport  During Heads of State or Government and minister-level events, transport services are  provided using VIP cars and minibuses. Transport can be outsourced either as a full service  with a chauffeur or vehicles only. Delegates travelling separately from the head of their  delegation and participants at expert-level meetings will use public transport or taxi service.  Coaches are used for the transport of heads of delegations and delegates to and from event  venues. During expert-level meetings, coaches are used if the number of participants requiring  transport to and from the same venue is sufficient, the distance is long and the location is not  easily accessible by public transport. Cooperation with local authorities is essential to ensure  the maintenance of roads, streets and public spaces and the availability of public transport.  Conference service  Estonia does not have a multifunctional conference centre that would allow the organisation  of meetings, seminars and conferences that meet the established Presidency standards at the  same venue during the six months of the Presidency. This means that a number of venues,  which should be adapted to suit the purpose, must be used, either at different times or at the  same time. Given the need to adapt the venues, the most resource-sustainable and reasonable  way is to hold several subsequent events at the same place. In terms of logistics, the most  rational and, from the guests’ point of view, most convenient way is to hold the majority of  Presidency events in Tallinn, which has the largest number of potential venues and hotels as  well as a fast connection to the airport.  The main conference services supporting the Presidency events are:  Event venues  A key to the success of Presidency meetings and other events is the functionality of event  venues and the professional organisation of events.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  23
Venues of different sizes will be needed depending on the structure and level of an event and  the number of participants.
Informal meetings of ministers require a plenary meeting room (hollow square style) for up to  90 participants with sufficient space for the so-called back-row and a sufficient number of  interpreters' and sound engineers' booths, an observation room with at least 60 seats, a media  centre for at least 300 members of the press and a number of auxiliary rooms. Interpreters’  booths should be located in the plenary meeting room and meet the detailed standards of the  European Commission.  Informal expert meetings usually have between 30 and 160 participants and are held in a  hollow square style plenary meeting room. Only some expert level meetings require  interpreting. There is little need for auxiliary rooms at informal meetings of experts. The  number of participants at different level conferences is between 50 and 100 people; therefore,  the need for venues varies. Normally, we will need one theatre-style plenary meeting room  and rooms of different setups for parallel sessions and discussions.  Formal dinners are served at suitable exclusive or historic venues, while during informal  expert meetings dinners may be held at restaurants suitable for the level of the event and  number of participants.  Interpretation  Interpretation will be provided by using both local interpreters and the services of the  European Commission Directorate General for Interpretation (SCIC). Informal meetings of  ministers are normally held with a 6-6 language regime (meaning that the participants can  speak in six languages, with interpretation provided: French, German, English, Italian,  Spanish and the official language of the Presidency). Broader language regimes are generally  used at the meetings of the ministers of justice, ministers of the home affairs and ministers of  agriculture (traditionally, such meetings have a 23-6 language regime which means that  delegates may speak in their native language but that interpretation is only provided into six  languages) as well as during summits with third countries and minister-level meetings with  third countries. The broadest language regime is used at the Conference of Parliamentary  Committees for Union Affairs of Parliaments of the European Union (COSAC) at which  simultaneous interpretation is provided from and into all official languages (including Irish).  The DG SCIC has laid down detailed requirements for the size and equipment of an  interpreters’ booth which need to be taken into account when selecting venues for meetings.  IT support  The delegates’ working area has an IT support desk and computers as well as equipment for  photocopying, printing and scanning. In the plenary meeting room, internet connection is  provided by a Wi-Fi network, while the data transfer rate and number of electric sockets must  be sufficient to meet the needs of all participants. At the venues of minister-level meetings,  operative information is provided through a dedicated information channel equipped with TV  screens. The IT support services manage the interpreting equipment. At high-level events that  attract the interest of the press and at which a press centre is set up, internet connection must
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  24
be sufficient for the press and transmission services (for uploading large scale visual  materials, videos and photos as well as for webcasting the event). The media centre should be  located at the venue or in its vicinity.  Information materials and aids  Information materials containing the programme of the event and practical information as  well as materials introducing Estonia are available in an electronic format to all participants.  To support the image of Estonia as a country that has its finger on the pulse of technology, we  wish to introduce new and upcoming digital possibilities to participants, the press and all  guests. When using the possibilities offered by digital technologies it should be borne in mind  that these may change thanks to continuing technical progress.  Catering  Heads of delegations and delegates are provided 1 or 2 buffet catering, depending on the level  and duration of an event; separate working dinners may be served to heads of delegations;  events may also include coffee breaks between sessions. Official dinners are held for heads of  delegations. Other participants can either take part in official dinners along with heads of  delegations or are served a separate buffet dinner, depending on the level of the event and the  venue.  Menus are planned so as to introduce our guests to local, fresh and healthy food; when  preparing the menus we will cooperate with programmes and interest groups that have similar  goals.  Accommodation  At minister-level meetings, the Presidency traditionally covers the cost of accommodation for  heads of delegations and one member of each delegation. Based on the events’ standard,  heads and members of delegations attending, high-level events are accommodated, if possible,  at 4-star hotels at the least. With regard to the expert-level meetings, the Presidency usually  offers a choice of hotels of different price levels located in the vicinity of the event venue; the  participants can book a hotel room through the Presidency’s website.  Medical assistance  Prompt medical assistance must be available for all participants both at event venues and  elsewhere. For that purpose, agreements are signed with providers of medical services.  Gifts and souvenirs  Sets of gifts and souvenirs for delegates and gifts for heads of delegations are prepared based  on the results of competitions to be held by the Communication Team of the Presidency and  the Organising Committee of Estonia 100. A number of sets are distributed to the officials of  other Member States in Brussels. Therefore, the ordering, storage and delivery of the sets of  gifts will be decided after the results of the competitions are available.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  25
Cultural programme  The cultural programme of the Presidency builds, as much as possible, on the Estonia 100  programme. However, short cultural programmes are usually available when using the  programme of public events is not possible (e.g. official dinners). Such programmes are  prepared taking into account the level and profile of the participants and the venue of the  specific event.  Ministers attending informal meetings can be accompanied by their spouses who will be  offered a separate programme. However, spouses rarely accompany ministers during informal  meetings and, therefore, a number of Presidencies have set a minimum number of participants  for spouses’ programmes. If the number of participants is smaller than the minimum number,  spouses are provided with information on and recommendations for events held during their  stay in Estonia.
3.3 Procurement
Tenders for Presidency events are coordinated by the Central Coordination Unit at the  Government Office. When preparing and carrying out tenders, we wish to make maximum  use of the existing expertise in the public sector. The volumes and conditions for tenders are  determined by the inter-ministerial working group on procurement issues. The Government  Office has signed cooperation agreements with the Centre of Registers and Information  Systems on the procurement of IT software and hardware, and with the State Shared Service  Centre on other procurements.  When preparing the schedule of procurements, we will identify the risks related to the goods  or services to be procured in order to eliminate those risks already in the planning stage. The  main risks to be considered include a small number of potential tenderers or lack of  competition, underestimated contract price, possible delays in the tender procedure,  description of goods or services so that the goods or the services would meet expectation and  time constraints on organising procurement procedures, including on preparing and assessing  tenders. The majority of tenders will be carried out in the second half of 2016 and the first  half of 2017.  Our aim is to sign contracts that are as flexible as possible in terms of both quantities as well  as time and allow taking into account any possible changes in the Presidency calendar.  Besides the provisions of the Public Procurement Act and the general principles of the EU  Presidency, the following principles are applied when planning and carrying out  procurements:   Procurements are carried out in the form of e-procedures to ensure efficient procedure  and communication;   Framework contracts are concluded;
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  26
 Tenders are assessed based on the award criterion ‘the most economically  advantageous tender’, while taking into account the operating costs of the goods or  services. The goal is to achieve economic advantage and best quality for the budgeted  amounts;   Respect for the environment – if possible, preference is given to solutions from which  the whole society would benefit in the long term. We will take into account the main  environmental impacts and comprehensive life cycles of the goods and services to be  procured.  As the experience of other Member States shows, the Presidency as an event of European  importance will attract sponsors in various fields, such as transport, tourism, ICT services,  catering, etc.  Sponsor agreements are subject to the provisions of the Public Procurement Act applicable to  a negotiated procedure with the publication of a contract notice.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  27
4 THE ESTONIAN PERMANENT REPRESENTATION TO THE  EUROPEAN UNION  4.1 Adaptation of the PREU building for the Presidency and supporting  activities
Approximately 90 people are currently working in the existing premises of the PREU, but  their number will increase to 190–200 people by the term of the Presidency. In addition to the  permanent personnel, there will be a major increase in the number of officials from Estonia  working in Brussels short-term (a few days) who will also need a mobile workstation in the  premises of the Representation or the General Secretariat of the Council. Furthermore, the  Presidency will bring more visitors from other Member States, third countries and EU  institutions, international organisations, NGOs and the private sector. The extension of the  PREU and the intensive work schedule will put the physical infrastructure of the  representation to the test.  Riigi Kinnisvara AS has carried out a work space analysis for the extension of the premises of  the PREU as well as the adaptation of technical possibilities and working conditions, and  concluded that the Presidency can be held using the existing premises. Based on the  analysis, it was decided to manage the Presidency from the current PREU building, which  will save costs compared with renting additional premises, facilitate the organisation of work  and simplify internal communication. There are 180 workstations planned in the building;  however, additional temporary workstations will allow increase that number. There will be 3  or 4 workstations in each room; the relevant ministries will provide the seconded employees  with laptop computers.  Specific solutions should take into account the Presidency needs and the nature of the work as  well as support the representative function of the premises. The PREU premises will be  functionally reorganised (redecorating rooms, upgrading lifts and the heating system,  upgrading the power and communication systems, ensuring high quality internet connection).  The experience of previous presidencies shows that the premises of the Permanent  Representation and the General Secretariat of the Council are also expected to host a number  of official events/receptions; therefore, design documentation is being prepared for  construction work to close the courtyard of the building in order to expand the reception area.  If the Brussels City Government approves our application, we will be able to build an  extensive indoor area that can also be divided into meeting rooms.  During the periods of preparing for and holding the Presidency there is a growing need for  meeting and video conference rooms. The PREU currently has three rooms equipped with  video conferencing technology; however, during the Presidency we will need additional space  and capacities both at the PREU and in the premises of the General Secretariat of the Council.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  28
To address the issue of the lack of space we can use, in addition to the PREU space, the  offices of the Estonian Delegation in the building of the General Secretariat of the Council  and the offices at the disposal of the Presidency can be used. In 2016, the offices of  delegations and the Presidency will be moved to a new building. When using the rooms in the  building of the General Secretariat of the Council, the Council or Coreper meetings to be held  the same day are given priority over other events.  4.2 Support activities in Brussels
The organisation of numerous meetings held in Brussels during the term of the Presidency  requires tight cooperation. Given the substantial increase in the number of PREU personnel  and the Ministers and delegations arriving from Tallinn before and during the Presidency, the  number of administrative personnel will be temporarily increased in line with the plan of  representation personnel approved by the Coordination Unit.  The administrative personnel will be responsible for the provision of the following support  services during the Presidency:   Logistics and transport services – the PREU will ensure transport for ministerial-level  delegations and other delegations in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg. In  accordance with the applicable procedure, transport services will be provided, as a  priority, to ambassadors, ministers and top executives of ministries.   IT and telecommunication services –the PREU will ensure data communication and IT  support services for personnel and guests, provide technical support during events held  in the premises of the PREU and ensure cyber security;   Secretarial and protocol services – the PREU will ensure necessary support services  for personnel and guests, technical preparations for events (booking rooms, ensuring  the availability of technical solutions and equipment, flower arrangements on tables)  through correct administration and document management;   Accounting services – PREU will ensure correct accounting. The personnel of the  PREU will double and the budget will increase accordingly.   Security services – the PREU will ensure the security and safety of personnel and  guests in the premises and proper handling of state secrets. As the Presidency will  significantly increase the number of events and meetings held in the premises of the  PREU, increasing the responsibility of the representation in managing the information  related to state secret;   Administrative support services – formalities and documentation related to additional  personnel being seconded to Belgium and communication with the protocol  department of the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The support services also  include assistance in concluding rental agreements, obtaining identification  documents, finding schools for children, opening bank accounts and obtaining medical
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  29
coverage. The personnel returning to Estonia after the term of the Presidency may also  need support (e.g. termination of contracts).
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  30
5 COMMUNICATION AND THE INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMME
A key to the success of the Presidency is efficient communication both with the Estonian  public and with other nations. The EU Presidency and the celebrations of the 100th  anniversary of the Republic of Estonia will provide a unique opportunity to show Estonia as a  reliable and innovative Member State.  In the context of the Presidency, communication has six objectives:   to ensure information exchange necessary for effective cooperation both within the  Presidency team and with key institutional cooperation partners, as well as shared  understanding of the goals, work organisation, preparations for and running of the  Presidency;   to bring to the public media and strategic target groups a clear understanding of the  principles and substantive goals of the Presidency and to create a basis for potential  cooperation, fitting expectations for the Presidency and its outcomes;   to explain to the public the organisation of, preparations for and running of the  Presidency;   to inform the domestic and foreign public and the media about EU policies and  decisions;   to communicate the interim and final outcomes of the Presidency to the public,  media and strategic target groups;   to take the opportunity to introduce Estonia as the country holding the EU Presidency  to the other EU nations, through the Estonian EU Presidency identity that is built upon  the brand of Estonia.
It is essential:   to ensure the availability of information about preparations for the Presidency –  ongoing procurements and competitions, and preliminary information about upcoming  procurements and competitions;   to provide stakeholders an opportunity to participate in the preparations;   to prefer modern and innovative communications solutions in order to support the  image of Estonia as an innovative e-Country.
5.1 Organisation of communication
Communication concerning the Estonian Presidency in 2016–2018 will be organised by the  Presidency Communication Network established in 2015 and comprising: a) the
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  31
Presidency Communication Team at the Government Office; the team is responsible for  overall coordination of communication; b) the Government Communication Unit; c) the  Brussels communication unit at the PREU; d) the PR coordinator of the Chancellery of the  Riigikogu; and e) the Presidency Communication Coordinators of Ministries will be  responsible for the organisation of communication in their areas of responsibility.  Estonia’s foreign missions and Estonian officials will also be involved in the organisation and  carrying out of communications relating to the Presidency; they will be provided with the  necessary information and an overview of the organisation of the Presidency.  The Presidency communication network has been actively involved in the development of the  strategic concept of the Presidency’s communication.  The areas of responsibility and tasks of all actors will be specified by the Estonian  Presidency's communication strategy (to be completed in late 2015).
5.2 The target groups for communication
The main target groups for Presidency communication are:   the Estonian public;   Estonian officials;   the personnel involved in preparing for and running the Presidency;   policy-makers from EU Member States and institutions;   European think tanks and political research centres;   Estonian and international media and reporters;   opinion leaders from Estonia and other Member States;   officials from EU institutions;   compatriots working at EU institutions and international organisations;   diplomatic missions of foreign countries in Estonia;   cooperation partners and officials interested in the progress of preparations.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  32
5.3 Principles of communication
The strategy of the Estonian Presidency is characterised by keywords, such as professional  and reliable. Communication principles are also guided by the strategic objectives of the  Presidency – the Presidency communication must be:   consistent – all parties share a common understanding of the communication strategy  and its objectives; communication is based on uniform messages;   coordinated and with clear division of roles – the principles of information exchange  and areas of responsibility have been agreed upon and cooperation takes place  between different communication network participants;   planned – communication is target-based and follows the agreed Action Plan, taking  into account both the brand of Estonia and the main themes (priorities) and messages  specified in the Presidency programme;   flexible –the ever-changing nature of conditions is taken into account in the  communication, while at the same time there is complete readiness for crisis  communications;   target group based – communication is planned based on key target groups and their  needs;   sectoral – each ministry is responsible for targeted communication in their area of  government;   competent –spokespersons and representatives of Estonia as holders of the Presidency  are trained and prepared in the field of communication;   inclusive – the process of preparations for the Presidency is transparent; experts are  consulted on creative ideas and solutions; volunteers are involved – all interested  parties can contribute to the success of the Presidency and the anniversary year.  5.4 Communication messages
The messages to be conveyed during the preliminary communication stage are defined in the  Communication Strategy of the Estonian Presidency of the Council of the European Union.
The Estonian EU Presidency identity, which includes visual identity, messages and marketing  solutions, will be developed, based on the brand of Estonia, during 2016. The identity is  developed in cooperation with Enterprise Estonia and the Organisational Team of Estonia  100; communication and marketing experts will be involved on a voluntary basis.
The main messages to be used in the Presidency communication will be developed, based on  the Estonian Presidency programme, during 2017.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  33
5.5 Communication stages
Based on the schedule of the preparations for the Presidency and the tasks specified above,  communication is divided into three stages, distinguished by their own objectives and  consequently, also by their functions, target groups, channels and actions.  Preliminary communication (2016 – first half of 2017)  At this stage, the main target groups are those in Estonia – the wider public, the media and  opinion leaders as well as the Russian-speaking population of Estonia.  Communication targeted to Estonia focuses on raising the population’s awareness of the EU  and of the Presidency, and creating expectations relevant to the context of the Presidency. At  this stage, we will also focus on coordinated and targeted internal communication to the  groups/individuals performing various roles within the framework of the Presidency and to  the officials involved in running the Presidency.  The main focus of external activities is on establishing relationships with the Brussels-based  international media corps and other EU media channels and members of the press.  We will work actively with the Brussel and EU think tanks; the work includes both preparing  the issues in the scope of the Presidency programme and planning communication to strategic  target groups (EU and international media, policymakers, opinion leaders, etc.).  Communication through official channels of the Council will be prepared in cooperation with  the General Secretariat of the Council.  Other important preparatory actions are also in line – development of the official Presidency  website and social media channels; development of content for the website; developing the  concept of the media centre for journalists in Tallinn and technical preparations in  coordination with the Estonian Public Broadcasting, etc.  Estonian media  An important target group at this stage is the media – it is essential to help various media  channels to prepare for professional and competent reporting on EU-related topics.  In the 2016 – 2018 period, the Estonian Presidency, the logic behind the functioning of the  EU and other strategic topics can be dealt with in more detail in the ‘media club’ format.  Journalists who are reporting, and will in the future report, on EU issues will be invited to the  media club, by the agreement of the various media channels. Important topics related to the  Presidency and the principles of the functioning of the EU will be addressed in workshops and  discussions.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  34
In the second half of the period, communication will focus more on explaining, in cooperation  with the media, the substantial objectives of the Presidency to the public and on initiating  discussions about possible decisions and choices.  Estonian EU Presidency identity  In order to introduce Estonia during the Presidency, the Estonian EU Presidency identity will  be developed. This identity is based on the brand of Estonia which will be renewed by the  beginning of 2016.Estonian EU Presidency identity, including the logo and the visual design  and marketing solutions, will be developed based on brand of Estonia, during 2016. This work  also includes the design of the official Presidency website and various items with the insignia  of the Presidency to be distributed both in Tallinn and in Brussels as well as elsewhere. The  Estonian EU Presidency identity also includes the concept of promotional items and souvenirs  to be approved by the end of 2016. In accordance with good practices, the visual identity of  the Presidency and the related marketing solutions will be made public only shortly before the  start of the Presidency.  Communication channels  At the preliminary communication stage, the main communication channel is the website  introducing preparations for the Presidency (eesistumine2018.ee/presidency2018.ee); the  website is in Estonian and partially available in English. Considering the need to inform the  Russian-speaking population both in Estonia and in neighbouring countries, and the Eastern  Partnership countries, the essential information is also available on the website in Russian.  Bearing in mind the needs of the Presidency team, the website also has an intranet part with  log-in access.
In the first quarter of 2016, a monthly Presidency newsletter will be issued in Estonian,  containing the most important news on the preparations and later also on the Presidency.  Dedicated social media channels will also be launched in 2016.  The Presidency (second half of 2017 – first half of 2018)  This stage, covering the period before and during the Presidency, entails a shift in focus – the  focus is now on Brussels, EU issues and the Brussels-based international media covering EU  issues. In Estonia, introducing the organisational side and the substance of the Presidency to  the public continues to be a priority.  Before the start of the Presidency, direct contacts are established both in Brussels and  elsewhere with the representatives of international media channels in order to introduce the  objectives and priorities of the Presidency. Furthermore, a more detailed plan is developed for  communicating the objectives/programme of the Presidency and the necessary partnership  agreements will be set.  At the beginning of the Presidency, information events concerning the objectives/programme  of the Presidency are organised in think tanks in Brussels and in other strategically important  locations, in order to discuss the relevant issues in the format of workshops, conferences, etc.  held before and during the Presidency. The main target groups comprise policy-makers in
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  35
Member States and EU institutions as well as opinion leaders across the EU. An information  package is also developed for Estonian missions in other Member States for the purpose of  introducing Estonia as holder of the Presidency and our substantive goals.  Conferences and informational/cultural events are to be held for different target groups before  and during the Presidency: These events are organised by both the government agencies and  other partners in Tallinn, Brussels and elsewhere.  High-level meetings and events are supported by the Presidency Communication Team, while  thematic events are organised by the communication coordinators in ministries.  Regarding the communication targeted to Estonia, the media club will continue introducing  the programme and priorities of the Presidency and the representatives of the Estonian press  will be invited to go on a study trip to Brussels. The visual identity, objectives and messages  of the Presidency as well as the marketing solutions designed to introduce the Estonian  Presidency internationally will be presented to the public. In order to support active reporting  on policymaking in the European Union and on the issues which are a focus of the  Presidency, it is also important to provide the media with sufficient information on summits  and ministerial meetings held in Brussels. Therefore, the number of reporters representing the  Estonian Public Broadcasting in Brussels should be increased before and during the  Presidency.  Residents of Tallinn will be informed, in cooperation with the Police and Border Guard  Board, about traffic restrictions and other changes.  The Media Centre  A media centre equipped with state-of-the-art technical solutions will be established in  Tallinn to provide facilities to foreign press covering the Presidency events. The media centre  will be located in the vicinity of the relevant event venue to provide facilities for press  conferences, briefings and interviews as well as the necessary working environment and  services to members of the press. The Estonian Public Broadcasting will be responsible for  ensuring webcasting and videos of high-level events held in Tallinn during the Presidency.  The General Secretariat of the Council will provide logistical and technical support to major  press conferences held in Brussels at the premises of the Council.  Visit of members of foreign press to Estonia  At the beginning of the term of the Presidency, members of the foreign press residing in  Brussels and reporting on EU issues are invited on a press visit to the country holding the  Presidency; the visit traditionally coincides with the visit of the Commissioners of the  European Commission and includes meetings with the top politicians of the presiding country,  introduction to the Presidency programme and objectives, as well as a cultural and  entertainment programme introducing the country. This visit programme also includes the  opening of the Presidency in Tallinn; the concept of the opening event will be developed as a  part of the international programme in cooperation with the Organisational Committee of  Estonia 100.
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  36
Communication channels  Immediately before the start of the Presidency, official channels of the Presidency will be  launched, the most important of them being the official Presidency website eu2018.ee which  includes the accreditation system, the Presidency calendar, introduction of the programme and  objectives of the Presidency, as well as the ongoing news on EU policy developments. The  primary target groups of the website are the media covering EU issues, officials of EU  institutions and EU policy-makers. The official languages of the Presidency website will be  Estonian, English, French and German.
Before the beginning of the Presidency, a Twitter account of the same name will be launched  in English, targeted primarily to the media covering EU issues (in Brussels and elsewhere).  The official Presidency website will be managed from Tallinn and other social media from  Tallinn and Brussels (with Twitter mainly from Brussels).  Conclusions and outcomes (second half of 2018)  Conclusions will be drawn in the weeks and months immediately following the term of the  Presidency and communicated to all strategic target groups and important partners both in  Estonia and elsewhere.
5.6 Introducing Estonia and the organisation of cultural events
Events supporting the EU Presidency outside Estonia will be organised together with the  planning of the cross-border activities of Estonia 100 under the Common International  Programme (hereinafter the Foreign Programme). The objectives of the programme are the  following:   to increase the visibility of Estonia in various areas in the period 2015–2018 (based on  the discussions of the Foreign Programme working group, the main areas are culture,  entrepreneurship, ICT, tourism and housing, education and research);   to act in a focused manner and in specific target countries;   to live up to the expectations related to the EU Presidency – to carry out the events  related to the Presidency, to cooperate with international organisations;   to be a cooperation partner to embassies and representations in planning and carrying  out the activities intended for 2018;   to support various cooperation networks in using the themes related to 2018 and in  developing international relations (bearing in mind also the impacts that carry on  beyond 2018);   to prepare the programme for 2018 presenting themes connected with expatriate  Estonian communities and kindred indigenous peoples;
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  37
 to reflect success stories back to Estonia and share information about programme  activities.
Foreign Programme working group
To advise on the programme and coordinate administrative cooperation, a working group was  established in early 2014, comprising representatives from the Ministry of Culture, Ministry  of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications, Ministry of Education  and Research, Enterprise Estonia and the Government Office. Based on the items on the  agenda, the working group cooperates with other authorities and organisations. The purpose  of the working group is to exchange information on developments in various areas, act as  contact points within the group members’ organisations and to disseminate information on the  Foreign Programme. Besides the working group members’ mailing list, summaries of  meetings and other information concerning the programme are forwarded to a wider audience  involved in the objectives and activities of the programme.
Target countries of the Foreign Programme
In the summer of 2015, the priority target countries of the programme were identified. These  countries are all EU Member States, except for those in which Estonia does not have foreign  representations. As regards the latter, two exceptions were made: Bulgaria (a Presidency in  the Trio with Estonia) and Hungary (linguistic and cultural relations). In addition, the target  countries include the countries neighbouring the EU with whom Estonia wishes to enhance  the level and intensity of international relations in 2018. The third group comprises North- America and some Asian countries. The activities outside the EU are justified by an  opportunity to introduce Estonia in the context of the Presidency of 2018. The Foreign  Programme brings together different themes and helps to create a single framework for  introducing Estonia in more distant target countries.
List of priority target countries of the Foreign Programme:
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Spain, The Netherlands, Ireland, Italy, Greece, Lithuania, Latvia,  Luxembourg, Poland, Portugal, France, Sweden, Romania, Germany, Finland, Denmark, The  Czech Republic, Hungary, The United Kingdom, Georgia, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Norway,  Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, Russia, The United States of America, Canada, China, Japan.
In exceptional cases, events are supported also in other countries (e.g. in countries of  significant international influence, etc.).
The Brussels programme
The Brussels programme will receive special attention in the context of the EU Presidency.  An important place in the Brussels programme is given to cooperation with two important
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  38
cultural and music centres whose role as co-organisers of events and attracting local audiences  cannot be underestimated. The first of them is Bozar, that traditionally hosts the opening  ceremony of the EU Presidency. In January 2018, the inauguration of the Estonian Presidency  will be celebrated in the Great Hall of the Bozar Gallery with a concert featuring a repertoire  and performers that well represent the culture of this Presidency. In addition to the Opening  Ceremony, negotiations are under way with Bozar for holding a number of musical events and  film, art and architecture exhibitions. The second major musical partner is Flagey, whose art  directors have agreed to associate several events in the first half of 2018 with Estonian music.  Estonia’s participation in 3 or 4 programmes, including orchestral, choir and jazz music  programmes as well as a programme of animation films, is being negotiated. Finalised  agreements with Bozar and Flagey are due to be concluded in the summer of 2016. In addition  to the larger projects, negotiations are under way for implementing a couple of smaller ideas  in the field of music. Working contacts have been established in the field of visual art (e.g.  with the Contemporary Art Centre WIELS) and an Estonia-themed exhibition is planned to be  held in the Musical Instruments Museum in Brussels. Besides the cultural events, discussions  have been held concerning education and research (bearing in mind the objectives of the  Estonian Liaison Office for EU RTD in Brussels).
Preparing the Foreign Programme
The main drivers of the programme will be various thematic or cross-cutting events. The  events to be held in 2018 in foreign countries can be largely divided into two categories:  thematic events which form a regular part in international relations and in 2018 will take place  under the auspices of the EU Presidency and the Estonia 100 programme; and events  specifically designed for the Foreign Programme.
Calls for proposals with the purpose of identifying suitable events for introducing Estonia in  foreign countries in 2018 will be announced (with the deadlines at the end of 2015 and in the  summer of 2016). The purpose of the calls for proposals is to collect specific proposals from  organisations in different fields and their foreign partners (whose existence and capacity to  contribute in the target country is one of the prerequisites of submitting a proposal). Thus, by  the middle of 2016 we should have an overview of the general readiness for organising events  under the Foreign Programme (including costs, geography, etc.).
In addition to the ideas identified through the calls for proposals, it should be kept in mind  that some target locations may not be covered by events. Therefore, we intend to prepare a  range of short programmes which can be used in different target locations (for example, to  enliven a reception or an event).
In addition to the events, the public space projects also have an important role. Estonia can be  introduced at indoor and outdoor exhibitions, installations, etc. held in public buildings or in  the urban space. All activities related to the public space will be based on a single concept to  be determined as a result of the competition for ideas announced by the Government Office.  The winning idea is expected to attract attention to Estonia, be vivid and captivating and
Version 3 – 10/12/2015  39
create new opportunities to introduce our country through different themes. What is also  important is how the idea is realised and disseminated, transported and presented in different  locations.